this incredible art that mostly
dates between 10 and 40,000
years ago what we often think of
course is the animals
but there's another enormous
group called the geometric lines
that old number
the animals and humans at most
sites by a ratio of two to one
or more so jun 2014 myself and
my husband and project
photographer Dylan we're at
northern Spain we're at a site
called kuvira cave and we were
so excited to finally be there
could be a very the entrances 30
meters up it's a hundred feet
it's a cathedral entrance in a
wooded hillside in the foothills
of the Pyrenees there's like a
whole wreath of dangling green
vines coming down its inviting
it wants you to come in and so I
can understand why people may
have decided to go in there
14,000 years ago
what's a little more difficult
to understand is why they
decided to go so far in because
the very first art is 780 meters
half a mile into the case you
can probably just see some faint
pigment markings on the wall
that is not model graffiti these
are not animals but they're not
writing either these are the
geometric science they came half
a mile to the cave to make these
if we enhance it
you can see a little bit more
this is a very cool color
enhancement program created by
american rock researcher John
Harmon and suddenly you can see
more but still no animals
nothing as far as the eye can
see this is very unusual animals
are normally found everywhere
but don't worry we've got to
keep going a little farther so
we keep going
three-quarters of a mile in and
there's another little
passageway here with two horses
the animals are represented
there just a completely
different section of cave and as
you can see they're very simple
but we've also have all this
detail that kind of lets you
know that there's something
going on there's a hint here
there's some artistic ability
its underlying what they're
doing here we got two horses
that's it you keep going a
little farther and now there's a
little crevice off to the right
this time and somebody went up
there to make these little dots
let me enhance it for you but
these little dots somebody took
their finger and dipped in paint
and made those marks and as so
often happens when I find myself
in these places
I'm like what were you doing
here
why did you come three-quarters
of a mile or 1.2 kilometers in a
cave to make thoughts so let me
introduce you to some of the
Paleolithic stone age art that
mostly dates between 10 and
40,000 years ago what we often
think of course is the animals
the animals are by far the
majority of what we call
figurative a representational
art a lot of hunting animals
we've already seen a horse
here's a deer we have a fabulous
purple base and it's the only
one of its kind because most of
the art when it's painted is
either red or black and so this
fabulous purple base and I would
just love him hes like this
unique little guy hanging out in
northern Spain so we've got him
and then also we do have a few
other figurative images of
humans and this is engraving
this is the other way that they
made the art but there's another
enormous group called the
geometric signs that outnumber
the animals and humans at most
sites by a ratio of two to one
or more they can be simple
things like the circle they can
be more complex things like this
incredibly complicated sign that
was located in this panel and
spain which is a one-off it's
the only one of its kind in the
world they can be . they can be
lines they can be triangles you
so that the full range
everything that's abstract and
that's kind of how they've been
defined over the years
abstract characters that don't
represent anything from the
mundane world so let me tell you
some of my phone results there
are only 32 signs across the
entire continent and a 30,000
year time period my friends
these are not random doodles are
decorations so was i noticed was
that this is actually each one
of them has its own distinct
patterning to these are not all
doing the same thing they're
doing different things in
different places so there were
patterns across space and time
and that's what's so intriguing
and exciting so let me show you
a couple of those patterns
this is a child's hand this is
27 thousand-year-old child's
hand now hands are fascinating
one because they're at their
most popular at the very
earliest time periods between 30
minutes between 25 and 40
thousand is when we find hands
after that they start to fade
out of popularity until they
vanish towards the end of the
ice age they just go away
people stopped making them
so that's one pattern another
pattern is very interesting is
this is called detective form so
this is like a roof shaped and
these are only made in the
northern region of france
between 30,000 and 17,000 years
ago
we're all located except for one
site 250 miles to the south
across the Pyrenees Mountains in
Spain and it is exactly the same
have talked to the researcher
that site we've looked at
pictures even down to the little
dots you can see the technique
that was used
it's the exact same thing how
did it get there
this is what's so fun about the
signs is that we can actually
follow people and ideas that
these incredible time depths and
get a sense of how their culture
was developing how are they
learning about symbolism what
was going on so we've got these
signs that were being used very
purposefully by people who
obviously know what they meant
the obvious question people
always want to know is it
writing and i'm sorry i'm here
today to show that it's not
ready yet though this
inscription as it's called is
called the inscription malossi
again this is a one-off and this
is the thing we don't have the
consistency yet we don't have
enough characters to represent
spoken languages we're not there
yet but that doesn't mean that
there's not very interesting
things going on
it's really funny because i just
spent all this time building my
nice little list of 32 and now
my next job is probably going to
be the smash it back apart
because there are some major
omissions there where's the
landscape features
where's the weaponry where's the
daily life did nobody look up at
the sky you know and so I think
that personally and this is what
we're starting to dig into know
i think a lot of these geometric
signs might actually be
representational as well and it
could give us some fascinating
insight into the ematic
categories and how these people
were understanding their world
quick example the pennant form
subpoena for means feather
shaped in Latin it's being
treated as a geometric sign but
there are contexts such as this
where people of muttered it kind
of looks like a tree so my
response would be maybe a tree
sometimes it's just a tree
maybe we don't have to over
complicate this and so this is
the kind of thing we're looking
at as well as questions about
clusters of dots potentially
being constellations or other
things which would make really
good sense and we see another
Rock our traditions what I've
done so far is just the baseline
this was the start those were
some really simple questions
there is so much left to be done
in Europe one big category that
was still missing here is that
my database does not have any of
the portable art and yet and yet
the sixteen thousand year old
necklace for instance from a
burial in France has 45
different geometric
configurations on it
think about how that can help me
understand what I'm seeing on a
big panel on a wall they seem to
be starting to group them up
that line the cross the line
i've seen that on a cave all
about 50 miles from there
so this is part of the story and
there are dusty artifacts
loitering all over Europe in
museums waiting to be documented
so this is very much the start
and imagine if we can start
expanding the work that I've
been doing in Western Europe to
a global level now those would
be some very big patterns
thank you